I spent a lot of time teaching at the
University of Toronto and at Harvard and
then more publicly looking at the core
stories that motivate Humanity the core
story is a hero myth and the hero goes
off into the adventure of his or her
life and confronts the dragon and
Garners the treasure and brings it back
to the community and distributes it okay
but in classic mythology the heroes are
virtually always men and so the women in
my classes always had a problem with
that if the hero myth is the central
story of
humanity well what does that mean for
women well in Christianity Christ is the
savior of women and men and Christ's
passion story is a extreme variant of
the hero myth and so there's a notion at
the bottom of our culture that the
pathway to Redemption for women is the
adoption of a heroic mode of being you
know in the face of life's difficulties
and and problems but there's more a
because the thing about women is that
their mythological orientation I think
is it's multi-dimensional and complex so
there's a couple of other mythological
variants that stack up beside the hero
myth for women there's Beauty in the
Beast where a woman finds a man who
might otherwise be somewhat monstrous
and predatory but maybe is oriented
positively in his fundamental nature
and she tames him and that's a story of
how women find a man who's sexually
attractive and also productive
responsible and useful that is the most
common female pornographic Fantasy by
orders of magnitude Beauty and the Beast
variant and then there's also the image
of women that's put forward let's say in
Christianity where you don't have an
individual woman you have woman and
infant as a as a
unit right and so
now I I
would perhaps hesitate to suggest that
part of the reason that you felt
isolated when you were pushing your pram
around small English town is because in
our society I saw the same thing with my
wife by the way when she had little kids
our society does not hold sacred the
image of women and infant woman and
infant as the fundamental unit of
female as a fundamental unit of female
identity
now you know women's nervous systems too
as far as I can tell women's nervous
systems are calibrated not for their own
happiness but for the joint success of
woman plus infant so women are more
agreeable which means they're more
empathic and uh more interested in
people and they're higher in negative
emotion which means they're a pretty
good alarm system now that increase in
negative emotion makes them susceptible
to depression and anxiety and that
increase in agreeableness makes them
susceptible to exploitation by
Psychopathic men but it's very much
benefit to their infants because you
have to be agreeable to take care of an
infant and you have to be an alarm
system to be sensitive enough to detect
all the threats in the environment that
might be said a vulnerable infant so
okay so that should move us into the
discussion of the third part of your
book it's like this is a way of
conceptualizing something
approximating uh female identity that'll
actually work for females possibly
taking taking a very short detour from
the book I mean on the on the question
of why I felt isolated pushing a baby
around small town Britain actually the
explanation for that was very simple
most of most of my peers had had a
Year's maternity leave which by the way
is pretty good compared to how how how
things are for most American women in
Britain you have a statutory six months
maternity leave everybody gets that paid
maternity leave and then you can take in
a further six months unpaid and most
women take the full year
which is which is a staggering amount of
maternity leave compared to the
situation in America where I believe
something like one in three mothers is
back at work Prett more or less before
she's even stopped bleeding after having
a baby which to me is frankly just
barbarous um but leaving that aside I
mean this is
the how we got to a point where most
where most women with dependent children
work and it's around 75% in the United
Kingdom is a long story in which the
feminism of freedom is is int
intricately bound up as I'm sure as I'm
sure you're aware um but but really the
the reason the reason I felt lonely
pushing a baby r smalltown l was very
straightforwardly there was no one to
talk to because most women were at work
and and which and really that I think
that was the first that was the first
article I ever wrote when I when I first
started to write in public was was a
reflection on the on the on the the slow
draining away and the slow whittling
away of civil society which had taken
place as a consequence of most women
embracing paid work which to be clear
has a great many positive consequences
but also has had this effect that really
its only retirees and a dwindling
proportion of public the of those public
spirited Boomers who are left who are
really holding holding my small town up
in terms of having a functioning social
fabric full stop and you know I clung I
clung to those older women who organized
CH baby groups and what have you um and
and gradually I found a social life and
you began life began to feel more normal
again but yeah I mean they're very very
straightforwardly the reason the reason
felt lonely was because I was want to
talk to and and and this is this is a
this is a coordination problem as as I'm
sure you can see um you know if if
there's nobody to talk to the only way
for there to be more people to talk to
is for there to be more people and
nobody wants to be no and no nobody
wants to be a state home M because
there's nobody to talk to so it's kind
of a vicious circle but just secondly
definitely but just secondly on the
question of Heroes Journeys for women I
actually wrote not in the book but but
elsewhere I wrote a short essay about
this a couple of years ago because in my
observation there is a hero's journey
for women it just doesn't follow the
same track as the male one um and in
fact it has three parts which correspond
to a very ancient archetype for for for
for what a woman a very ancient female
archetype which is the maiden the mother
and the matriarch the triple goddess
who's a figure out of out of some Pagan
Traditions some uh in in which these are
the three faces of these are the three
faces of the same goddess as it were but
they they they take on different aspects
at different parts of woman's life and
anecdotally to me it Stacks pretty
closely with what the what actually a
majority of normally women's lives look
like you know as the maiden you're free
you you have a sort of warrior aspect
you and perhaps that's the point where
you're pursuing you're pursuing
ambitious professional projects um the
mother is more oriented towards home and
the domestic sphere and you know
probably probably just doesn't bluntly
doesn't care about work as much I mean I
I know a great many very high-powered
maidens who reached motherhood perhaps
in their early 30s and then just found
they they just didn't care about the
deadlines and the spreadsheets anymore
couldn't give us stuff I mean this
anecdotal I'm sure yeah anecdotally
that's pretty common and then but then
later on and this was something that I
found very interesting when I did a
Psychotherapy training in the late in
the late ORS and early 10 was just how
many of the just how many of the
trainees on that on that course were
women in their late in their 50s and 60s
so these were women who for the most
part already had already had young adult
children their kids had gone off to
University or or were soon to leave for
University um so they'd pretty much done
the motherhood Arc they'd done the
mother part of that and they were moving
into a new phase of Life they were
moving to into what I think of as The
Matriarch space I mean the I think the
the classic three-part goddess term for
this is Crone but I mean you know they
were some way from cron Hood these were
Lively vital energetic public-spirited
women who had some life experience they
had a lot of connections they had a rich
social life they'd met lots of people
and and they were ready to give
something back and and what I've and
I've it's in my observation there are a
huge number of women who reach the end
of the mother Arc the the mother part of
that hero's journey and then and then
Embrace some perhaps and will then
retrain so they'll have they'll have
three careers they might have a so so
they'll be very professional in their
20s they'll be a bit more a bit pretty
somewhat more part-time maybe 30 to 50
and then they'll then they'll retrain
and they'll do something like
Psychotherapy or they'll do Ministry or
they'll do uh spiritual counseling or
they'll do some or or or or in some
other way become involved in the
community and and they'll want to do
something public spirited and give back
and and those and those those women are
a hugely Rich Force for for for for
deepening deepening reflection in the
culture for for for public service for
all manner of all manner of incredibly
positive um you usually quite
self-facing but incredibly positive
constructive and you know lifegiving um
contribution to to the social Fabric and
they're and they they're incredibly
marginalized in they're almost
completely invisible in terms of the
liberal feminist narrative which really
centers the maiden and it wants to
foreground the maiden and to and to tell
women that the hero's journey means
essentially being the maiden for their
entire life and everything else is just
you know the mother is pretty much the
you know at best if the mother is
noticed it's as a problem to be solved
and and the and the matriarch doesn't
really get a look in at all and if she
does it's only so that she can be
denounced for being a turf or you know
in some other way you know spat on for
being you know a dinosaur or obsolete or
you know oldfashioned or you know out of
touch or or or in some other way
irrelevant or or ridiculous and in fact
these women are the backbone of the
social fabric I mean those are the women
who are making who are making cups of
making weak Cups of Tea for slightly
traumatized new mothers like I was in
Small Town England and telling me I'm
doing fine and really that mattered a
lot at the time you know those are those
are the women who are running who are
running brownies groups for no money
every every Wednesday because they can
and because they want to give back those
are the women who are who are retraining
as counselors and helping helping
traumatize people for free you know th
those are the women who keep things
going and and and yet somehow the the
liberal feminist version of the heroes
Journey just doesn't see them at all and
I think I I and i' so I've been very
keen to make a case for for for a richer
if you like a three-part um to to
opening a space for thinking about
women's Heroes Journeys in in in a more
spacious way which actually just
observes what life looks like for for
mothers and for in in in the in in the
Arc of what what what the average
woman's life looks like when when she
does have a when when she does become a
mother
[Music]